

--- Pages 30 to 32 ---

## CHAPTER 1
## Introduction to
## Entrepreneurship

## OPENING PROFILE
## SUPERJAM
## The Classic Entrepreneurial Story

- Web: http://www.superjam.co.uk • Facebook: SuperJam 100% Fruit Spread • SuperJam's Recipe App

Growing up in Scotland, Fraser Doherty spent his childhood coming up with ideas 
for new products. Not all his money-making ideas were a success—indeed, his 
fledgling egg-selling enterprise ended abruptly when a fox ate all his chickens—
but he had a hunger to set up a business.

At the age of 14, Doherty gave jam-making a try. He had always 
enjoyed the jam his grandmother made and thought there might be an 
opportunity here. After making a batch and selling it door-to-door, he 
discovered people really liked it, and Doherty's jam enterprise gradually 
spread into local shops and farmers' markets. A feature in the 
Edinburgh Evening News brought in even more orders from further 
afield.

After resolving to expand the business, Doherty did some research 
and found that sales of jam had been in decline for the past few 
decades. Jam had acquired an old-fashioned image and people 
preferred healthier alternatives on their toast.

The solution the young Scottish entrepreneur came up with was a 
jam for the modern world. Doherty's SuperJam would be made using 
traditional recipes, completely from fruit juice. The jars would contain 
no sugar and no artificial flavoring. He also boldly resolved to target 
supermarkets to sell his products.

Fraser faced a number of challenges. At this point, he was making 
hundreds of jars of jam every week in his parents' kitchen. Apart from 
the fact his parents were struggling to get in there to cook their dinner, 
the business clearly couldn't grow any further.

At the age of 17, he was in no position to start a factory and did 
not have any money to pay a design agency to create a brand. He did 
not have a clue about how to approach supermarkets either. All he had was a passion 
about his product and a great recipe.

The first supermarket Fraser approached was Waitrose on a "meet the buyer" day. 
Fraser pitched his idea to the senior jam buyer—he liked it but said it had a long way to 
go. He advised Fraser to set up a production facility and create a brand before coming 
back with a well-priced product.

## LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter you should be 
ready to:

1. Describe entrepreneurship, corporate 
entrepreneurship, and the characteristics 
of entrepreneurial firms.

2. Discuss three main reasons people 
decide to become entrepreneurs.

3. Identify four main characteristics of 
successful entrepreneurs.

4. Explain five common myths regarding 
entrepreneurship.

5. Describe the three types of start-up 
firms.

6. Discuss the changing demographics of 
entrepreneurs in the United States.

7. Discuss the positive effects of 
entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial 
firms on economies and societies.

8. Explain the entrepreneurial process.

9. Learn how understanding 
entrepreneur- 
ship and the entrepreneurial process can 
facilitate your career success.

## MyLab Entrepreneurship 
## Improve Your Grade!
If your instructor is using MyLab Entrepreneurship, visit 
www.pearson.com/mylab/entrepreneurship for 
videos, simulations, and writing exercises.

## 30 PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR

Fraser set off around the United Kingdom trying to convince food 
manufacturers to believe in his 100 percent fruit jam. He told them that he didn't have 
any money to invest, but if they took the long-term view, then they too would reap the 
benefit. He did and an advertising agency to persuade them to help him create a 
brand. Eventually, after two years of persistence, Doherty finally convinced a factory 
and an advertising agency to work with him.

SuperJam is exhibited in the National Museum of Scotland as an "Iconic Scottish 
Brand" alongside Irn-Bru and Tunnock's and Baxters, two other brands synonomous 
with Scotland. In 2010, Fraser shared his jam-making secrets with the world 
in the SuperBusiness Cook; this was followed in 2011 by his autobiography and jam 
story, SuperBusiness. Since 2010, Fraser has been the entrepreneur-in-residence at 
the London Metropolitan University, where he delivers presentations and lectures on 
aspects of entrepreneurship.

Doherty has kept close to his customers throughout SuperJam's meteoric rise and is 
conscious of the part technology and, in particular, social networks play in his business 
and in maintaining a meaningful conversation with his customers.

Against a backdrop of digital social networking, SuperJam Tea Parties are about 
as far removed from the virtual world as you could imagine. The company runs these 
events for elderly people who live alone, primarily in care homes or sheltered 
accommodation. To date, they have run over 350 events across the United Kingdom. The 
mix of live music, dancing, a heavy dose of scones, and SuperJam attract up to 600 
people to each event.

From humble beginnings working at his kitchen table to growing his entrepreneurial 
venture, Fraser now supplies over 2,000 supermarkets around the world with 
SuperJam and has won a variety of awards for the range. Fraser has now scooped up 
over 20 prestigious awards, including Bighearted Scotland Business Person of The 
Year (2009), Smarta 100 Award (2010), and Inc. magazine's 30 under 30 Award 
(2010). He also made the finals for "Times Young Power List" (2011), NatWest 
Enterprise Awards Finalist (2012), and Ben & Jerry's "Join Our Core" Finalist 
(2012).

## 31

## Introduction to 
## Entrepreneurship

There is tremendous interest in entrepreneurship around the world. Although 
this statement may seem bold, there is evidence supporting it, some of which 
is provided by the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). GEM, which is a 
joint research effort among several international universities and the 
International Council for Small Business, tracks entrepreneurship in 112 
countries, including the United States. Of particular interest to GEM is total 
early-stage entrepreneurial activity (TEA), which consists of businesses that are 
just being started and businesses that have been in existence for less 
than three and a half years. A sample of the rate of total early-stage 
entrepreneurial activity in 
countries included in the GEM study is shown in Table 1.1. Although the 
high- 
est rates of entrepreneurial start-up activities occur in low-income 
countries, 
where good jobs are not plentiful, the rates are also impressive in 
high-income 
countries such as Germany (4.7 percent), United 
Kingdom (6.9 percent), and 
the United States (11.9 percent). What the 11.9 percent means for the 
United 
States is that almost 1 out of every 8 1/2 American adults is 
actively engaged 
in starting a business or is the 
owner/manager of a business that is less than 
three-and-a-half-years old.

The GEM study also identifies whether its respondents are 
starting a new 
business to take advantage of an attractive opportunity or because of 
necessity 
clination for innovation like Germany and the United States, the 
number of 
people who start businesses to pursue an opportunity outnumber the 
people 
who are starting a business out of necessity 3.4 to 1.0.

One criticism of entrepreneurship, which is often repeated in 
the press, is 
that the majority of new businesses fail. 
It simply isn't true. The often 
used statistic that 9 out of 10 businesses fail in their first 
few years is an 
exaggeration.

## TABLE 1.1 Rates of Early-Stage Entrepreneurial 
## Activity (Ages 18 to 64)

| Country | Percent of Population Starting 
a New Business |
| --- | --- |
| Argentina | 17.7% |
| Brazil | 21.0% |
| Chile | 25.9% |
| China | 12.8% |
| Finland | 6.6% |
| Germany | 4.7% |
| Philippines | 17.2% |
| Spain | 5.7% |
| United Kingdom | 6.9% |
| United States | 11.9% |

Source: Based on D. Kelley, S. Singer, and M. Herrington, 
Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor 2015/6 Global Report (Babson, Universidad del 
Desarrollo, Universiti 
Tun Abdul Razak, Tecnologico de Monterrey, and 
International Council for Small 
Business, 2015/6).

--- Pages 33 to 35 ---

## Step 1: Extract text from the first image
In the United States, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, over half the businesses started are still in existence five years later. The number drops to just over a third after 10 years, but some of the businesses disappeared because they were successful and were sold or were acquired by another firm. While overall these figures are heartening, the percentage of firms that do fail shows that a motivation to start and run a business isn't enough; indeed, motivation must be coupled with a solid business idea, good financial management, and effective execution to maximize chances for success. In this book, we'll discuss many examples of entrepreneurial firms and the factors separating successful new ventures from unsuccessful ones.

Many people see entrepreneurship as an attractive career path. Think about your friends and others you know. In all probability, you are acquainted with at least one or two people who want to become an entrepreneur—either now or at some point in the future. The number of books dealing with starting one's own business is another indication that entrepreneurship is growing in popularity. Amazon.com, for example, currently lists over 58,510 books dealing with entrepreneurship and over 80,686 books concerned with small businesses. The number of books on entrepreneurship is up from 36,900 just three years ago.

## Step 2: Extract text from the first image (continued)
## What Is Entrepreneurship and Why Is It Important?

LEARNING OBJECTIVE

1. Describe entrepreneurship, corporate entrepreneurship, and the characteristics of entrepreneurial firms.

The word entrepreneur derives from the French words entre, meaning "between," and prendre, meaning "to take." The word was originally used to describe people who "take on the risk" between buyers and sellers or who "undertake" a task such as starting a new venture. Inventors and entrepreneurs differ from each other. An inventor creates something new. An entrepreneur assembles and then integrates all the resources needed—the money, the people, the business model, the strategy, and the risk-bearing ability—to transform the invention into a viable business.

Entrepreneurship is defined as the process by which individuals pursue opportunities without regard to resources they currently control for the purpose of exploiting future goods and services. Others define entrepreneurship as the art of turning an idea into a business. In essence, an entrepreneur's behavior finds him or her trying to identify opportunities and putting useful ideas into practice. The tasks called for by this behavior can be accomplished by either an individual or a group and typically require creativity, drive, and a willingness to take risks. Kirsten Blowers, the subject entrepreneur in the chapter's "Opening Profile," exemplifies all these qualities. Kirsten saw an opportunity to create a new type of women's clothing boutique and online store and a new type of shopping experience for the women in her target market. She risked her career by passing up alternatives to work on Riffraff full time, and she's now working hard to put Riffraff in a position to deliver creative and useful products to its customers.

In this book, we focus on entrepreneurship in the context of an entrepreneur or team of entrepreneurs launching a new business. However, ongoing firms can also behave entrepreneurially. Typically, established firms with an entrepreneurial emphasis are proactive, innovative, and risk-taking. For example, Google is widely recognized as a firm in which entrepreneurial behaviors are clearly evident. Larry Page, one of Google's cofounders, is at the heart of Google's entrepreneurial culture. With his ability to persuade and motivate others' imaginations, Page continues to inspire Google's employees as they develop innovative product after innovative product. To consider the penetration Google has

## Step 3: Extract text from the second image
## What Is Entrepreneurship and
Why Is It Important?

## CHAPTER 1 | INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP 33

at least one or two people who want to become an entrepreneur—either now or at some point in the future. The number of books dealing with starting one's own business is another indication that entrepreneurship is growing in popularity. Amazon.com, for example, currently lists over 58,510 books dealing with entrepreneurship and over 80,686 books concerned with small businesses. The number of books on entrepreneurship is up from 36,900 just three years ago.

## Step 2: Extract text from the second image (continued)
## LEARNING OBJECTIVE

2. Discuss three main reasons people decide to become entrepreneurs.

## Why Do People Become Entrepreneurs?

The three primary reasons that people become entrepreneurs and start their own firms are to be their own boss, pursue their own ideas, and pursue financial rewards.

## Be Their Own Boss

The first of these reasons—being one's own boss—is given most commonly. This doesn't mean, however, that entrepreneurs are difficult to work with or that they have trouble accepting authority. Instead, many entrepreneurs want to be their own boss because either they have had a long-time ambition to own their own firm or because they have become frustrated working in traditional jobs. The type of frustration that some entrepreneurs feel working in conventional jobs is exemplified by Wendy DeFeudis, the founder of VeryWendy, a company that makes customized social invitations. Commenting on how her experiences working for herself have been more satisfying than working for a large firm, DeFeudis remarked:

I always wanted to be my own boss. I felt confined by the corporate structure. I found it frustrating and a complete waste of time—a waste to have to sell my ideas to multiple people and attend all kinds of internal meetings before moving forward with a concept.

Some entrepreneurs transition from a traditional job to owning their own business more gradually, as shown by a decision to initially operate their firm on a part-time basis. While this approach isn't possible in all situations, by starting money they earn, and find out if they really like the business before deciding to leave their job. In some businesses, such as catering or financial planning, it takes time to build a client list. Some entrepreneurs will time their departure from their job with the point in time at which their client list is large enough and profitable enough to support a full-time business.

## Pursue Their Own Ideas

The second reason people start their own firms is to pursue their own ideas. The three primary reasons that people become entrepreneurs and start their own firms are to be their own boss, pursue their own ideas, and pursue financial rewards.

## Step 3: Extract text from the third image
An entrepreneurial career
is full of possibilities.
These three young
entrepreneurs are starting
a graphic design business.
They are passionate
about website design,
logo design, and business
branding.

working for herself have been more satisfying than working for a large firm, DeFeudis remarked:

I always wanted to be my own boss. I felt confined by the corporate structure. I found it frustrating and a complete waste of time—a waste to have to sell my ideas to multiple people and attend all kinds of internal meetings before moving forward with a concept.14

Some entrepreneurs transition from a traditional job to owning their own business more gradually, as shown by a decision to initially operate their firm on a part-time basis. While this approach isn't possible in all situations, by starting a business part-time individuals can gain valuable experience, tuck away the money they earn, and find out if they really like the business before deciding to leave their job. In some businesses, such as catering or financial planning, it takes time to build a client list. Some entrepreneurs will time their departure from their job with the point in time at which their client list is large enough and profitable enough to support a full-time business.15

## Pursue Their Own Ideas

The second reason people start their own firms is to pursue their own ideas.16

Some people are naturally alert, and when they recognize ideas for new products or services, they have a desire to see those ideas realized. Corporate entrepreneurs who innovate within the context of an existing firm typically have a mechanism for their ideas to become known. Established firms, however, often resist innovation. When this happens, employees are left with good ideas that go unfulfilled.17 Because of their passion and commitment, some employees choose to leave the firm employing them in order to start their own business as the means to develop their own ideas.

This chain of events can take place in noncorporate settings, too. For example, some people, through a hobby, leisure activity, or just everyday life, recognize the need for a product or service that is not available in the marketplace. If the idea is viable enough to support a business, they commit tremendous time

--- Pages 36 to 38 ---

**CHAPTER 1 | INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP 35**

and energy to converting the idea into a part-time or full-time firm. In Chapters 2 and 3, we focus on how entrepreneurs spot ideas and determine if their ideas represent viable business opportunities.

Many entrepreneurs experience tremendous satisfaction when their entrepreneurial idea catches on, and they see the positive results it creates. An example is Marco Zappacosta, the founder of Thumbtack. Thumbtack is an online platform that allows people to quickly locate local service providers, such as photographers, house painters, and piano teachers. Zappacosta's insight at the time Thumbtack was founded in 2009 was that all across America there were local service providers struggling to find new clients, and ordinary people looking for service providers they could trust. Commenting on how Thumbtack solves both a big problem but also makes a difference in ordinary people's lives, Zappacosta remarked:

The macro of it (connecting people who need services with people who are willing to provide them) is a big problem and it's satisfying to work on big things that can have a huge impact. But then what (I) really like—you feel day to day is the stories of impacting individuals, it's the pest control guy in Brooklyn sending us flowers to say thank you for all the business that we're now sending him, or the busy mom who is sending pictures of her birthday party that she was able to throw with Thumbtack. That feels great and that's certainly a bigger part of the motivation that we feel.

Since its inception, Thumbtack has helped millions of people connect with local service providers and over $1 billion is exchanged through its platform each year.

**Pursue Financial Rewards**

Finally, people start their own firms to pursue financial rewards. This motivation, however, is typically secondary to the first two and often fails to live up to its hype. The average entrepreneur does not make more money than someone with a similar amount of responsibility in a traditional job. The financial lure of entrepreneurship is its upside potential. People such as Jeff Bezos of Amazon.com, Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook, and Larry Page and Sergey Brin of Google made billions of dollars building their firms. Money is also a unifier. Making a profit and increasing the value of a company is a solidifying goal that people can rally around. But money is rarely the primary motivation behind the launch of an entrepreneurial firm. Some entrepreneurs even report that the financial rewards associated with entrepreneurship can be bittersweet if they are accompanied by losing control of their firm. For example, Sir Richard Branson, after selling Virgin Records, wrote, "I remember walking down the street [after the sale was completed]. I was crying. Tears . . . [were] streaming down my face. And there I was holding a check for a billion dollars . . . . If you'd have seen me, you would have thought I was loony. A billion dollars." For Branson, it wasn't just the money—it was the thrill of building the business and of seeing the success of his initial idea.

**Characteristics of Successful Entrepreneurs**

Although many behaviors have been ascribed to entrepreneurs, several are common to the successful ones. Those in new ventures and those who are already part of an entrepreneurial firm share these qualities, which are shown in Figure 1.1 and described in the following section.

**LEARNING OBJECTIVE**

3. Identify four main characteristics of successful entrepreneurs.

**36 PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR**

One of the most satisfying things about an entrepreneurial career is bringing products to life that enhance people's lives. This young woman is enjoying watching a music video provided by an online streaming music service started by two entrepreneurs.

**FIGURE 1.1**

**Four Primary Characteristics of Successful Entrepreneurs**

* Passion for the business
* Product/customer focus
* Execution intelligence
* Tenacity despite failure

## Passion for the Business

The number one characteristic shared by successful entrepreneurs is a passion for their business, whether it is in the context of a new firm or an existing business. Frequently, it's the passion for an idea that gets a business going and keeps it going when times are tough. This sentiment was expressed by Patrick Whaley, the founder of Titin, a company that makes innovative weighted compression gear, which some athletes have found useful in training. "I'm passionate about her business" and that's what inspired me to design and develop this product, and that's what keeps me going." Recall that Kirsten Blowers, the owner of Riffraff and the subject company of the chapter's "Opening Profile" remains "passionate about her business" and that this passion influences her daily as she leads her businesses.

**37**

Making a difference in people's lives is the primary motivator behind many social enterprises, which are often started by people who set aside promising careers to pursue a social goal. This was the case with John Wood, who founded Room to Read and is the author of the book Leaving Microsoft to Change the World. Wood's deep passion in small amounts of Microsoft stock to buy books and build schools, even before he left the company. In excerpts from an interview published by Forbes magazine, Wood said:

During my travels, I met so many children in the poorest parts of the world, lacking access to school, books, and libraries, that I began cashing in small amounts of access to school, books, and libraries, that I began cashing in small amounts of stocks to help them. Two hundred shares of Microsoft stock was enough to build an entire school in rural Nepal.

Wood eventually left Microsoft to work on Room to Read full time. Since its inception in 2000, Room to Read has served over 10.7 million children, published 1,295 books, and delivered over 18 million books to young readers, all in developing parts of the world.

Passion is particularly important for both for-profit and not-for-profit entrepreneurial organizations because although rewarding, the process of starting a firm or building either a profit-making corporation or a social enterprise is demanding. There are five primary reasons passion is important, as reflected in Table 1.2. Each of these reasons reflects a personal attribute that passion engenders. Removing just one of these qualities would make it much more difficult to launch and sustain a successful entrepreneurial organization.

A note of caution is in order here: While entrepreneurs should have passion, they should not wear rose-colored glasses. It would be a mistake to believe that all one needs is passion and anything is possible. It is important to be enthusiastic about a business idea, but it is also important to understand its potential flaws and risks. In addition, entrepreneurs should understand

**TABLE 1.2 Five Primary Reasons Passion Is Important for the Launch of a Successful Entrepreneurial Organization**

| Reason Passion Is Important | Explanation |
| --- | --- |
| 1. The ability to learn and iterate | Founders don't have all the answers. It takes passion and drive to solicit feedback, make necessary changes, and move forward. Needed changes won't always be obvious. Passion makes the search for the right answers invigorating and fun. |
| 2. A willingness to work hard for an extended period of time | Commonly, entrepreneurs work longer hours than people with traditional jobs. You can only do that on a sustained basis if you're passionate about what you're doing. |
| 3. Ability to overcome setbacks and "no's" | It's rare that an entrepreneur doesn't experience setbacks and hear many "no's" from potential customers, investors, and others while building an entrepreneurial business or a social enterprise. The energy to continue comes from passion for an idea. |
| 4. The ability to listen to feedback on the limitations of your organization and yourself | You'll meet plenty of people along the way—some with good intentions and some without—who will tell you how to improve your organization and how to improve yourself. You have to be willing to listen to the people with good intentions and make changes if it helps. But you also have to be able to brush aside feedback from people with bad intentions without letting them get you down. |
| 5. Perseverance and persistence when the going gets tough | Perseverance and persistence come from passion. As an entrepreneur, you'll have down days. Building an entrepreneurial organization is fraught with challenges. Passion is what provides an entrepreneur the motivation to get through tough times.

--- Pages 39 to 41 ---

## Step 1: Extract text from page 1

that the most effective business ideas take hold when their passion is consistent with their skills and is in an area that represents a legitimate business opportunity.

To illustrate the importance of passion, as well as other factors that are critical in determining a firm's success or failure, we include a boxed feature titled "What Went Wrong?" in each chapter. The feature for this chapter shows how Prim, a laundry and pick-up and delivery service, ultimately failed, in part because its founders were not able to remain passionate about their business idea.

## Step 2: Extract text from page 2

## Product/Customer Focus

A second defining characteristic of successful entrepreneurs is a **product/customer focus**. This quality is exemplified by Steven Jobs, the late co-founder of Apple Inc., who wrote, "The computer is the most remarkable tool we've ever built . . . but the most important thing is to get them in the hands of as many people as possible." ${ }^{24}$ This sentiment underscores an understanding of the two most important elements in any business-products and customers. While it's important to think about management, marketing, finance, and the like, none of those functions makes any difference if a firm does not have good products with the capability to satisfy customers.

This philosophy is affirmed by Alex Algard, the founder of WhitePages.com. WhitePages.com started in 1997 to provide consumers a free, accurate, and fast online alternative to telephone directory assistance. It is one of the most trusted and comprehensive sources for consumers to quickly find relevant, accurate contact information in North America. When asked how he was able to grow WhitePages.com from a one-person operation in 1997 to the multimillion-dollar company it is today, Algard's reply reflected not only his feelings about the importance of providing value to both users and customers but also how a company measures if the value is being successfully delivered:

The philosophy that we as a company have always stuck to is that everything we build has to provide real value to both our users and customers. The best measure-ment of whether or not we are successful at delivering something valuable is if our customers, advertisers in our case, are willing to pay. ${ }^{25}$

A product/customer focus also involves the diligence to spot product opportunities and to see them through to completion. The idea for the Apple Macintosh, for example, originated in the early 1980s when Steven Jobs and several other Apple employees took a tour of a Xerox research facility. They were astounded to see computers that displayed graphical icons and pull-down menus. The computers also allowed users to navigate desktops using a small, wheeled device called a mouse. Jobs decided to use these innovations to create the Macintosh, the first user-friendly computer. Throughout the two and a half years during which the Macintosh team developed this new product, it maintained an intense product/customer focus, creating a high-quality computer that is easy to learn, fun to use, and meets the needs of a wide audience of potential users. ${ }^{26}$ Apple's early history, and in particular its commitment to building high-quality products, has been portrayed in several movies, including Pirates of the Silicon Valley (2005) and JOBS (2013).

Additional examples of product/market focus are provided in an excellent weekly podcast produced by National Public Radio (NPR) called "How I Built This." Each episode provides an in-depth interview with the founder of a well-known firm, and provides a complete overview of how the firm was built and won customers. Guests have included Joe Gebbie, the cofounder of Airbnb; Angie Hicks, the founder of Angie's List; Jane Wurwand, the founder of Dermalogica; and Yvon Chouinard, the founder of Patagonia. ${ }^{27}$

## Step 3: Extract text from page 3

## WHAT WENT WRONG?

## Prim: How a Lack of Passion and Resolve Can Kill a Business

Prim's idea was to disrupt the laundry industry. A growing number of people in the United States are using laundry services to wash and fold their clothes. The problem with these services is that they are a hassle. In most instances customers have to bag their laundry, drop the bag or bags off at the laundry service, and then pick them up later. Many services have lines at the busiest times of the day, which result in drivers having to wait to drop off or pick up their laundry.

Prim launched in mid-2013, after passing through the prestigious Y Combinator business accelerator program earlier that year. Here's how Prim's laundry service worked. A customer bagged her/his laundry, and then went online to choose a pickup and delivery time. The price was $\$ 25$ for the first bag and $\$ 15$ for each additional bag. The bags would be picked up by a driver recruited by a third-party delivery service. (Rickshaw was the name of the delivery service in the city where Prim started.) Everything would be back, washed and folded, later that day or early the next day. No cash changed hands between the customer and the pickup or delivery drivers. Everything was paid for through Prim's website. Prim gained favorable press and early momentum. When it closed, it was handling 1,000 pounds of laundry a day from 40 clients and was growing.

## 4: Extract text from page 4

Two things went wrong with Prim. First, once Prim got your clothes, it went from an innovative disruptor to an old-school company. It would take your clothes to a laundry service and utilize its wash and fold services. Prim negotiated volume discounts with several laundry services; but, the discounts were verbal, not written. What Prim didn't count on was the partnerships going sour. While the laundry services were initially receptive to working with Prim, they had their own delivery services and eventually saw Prim as siphoning off their customers and revenue. During its short history, Prim churned through three different laundry services.

The second thing that went wrong with Prim was a lack of passion and resolve on the part of its founders. Faced with the reality that working with local laundry services was a fragile business model, Prim's founders, Yin Yin Wu and Xuwen Cao, had a decision to make. Should they build or lease their own laundry service? This was a daunting prospect, given the hundreds of thousands of dollars necessary to build and staff a high-volume laundry wash and fold facility. Even more daunting was the prospect that this step would need to be repeated

in each new market Prim entered. After two months of deliberation, Wu and Cao pulled the plug. While they estimated that by constructing their own laundry service they could build a profitable business in 5 to 10 years, with revenues of $\$ 10$ million to $\$ 15$ million, it was a direction they simply did not want to pursue. Both were computer science students in college and had no direct experience in the laundry business. In an article published by CNNMoney, Garry Tan, a partner with Y Combinator, reflecting on why Wu and Cao closed Prim, said, "They didn't want to actually have to wash the laundry-they wanted to be the connector."

## Questions for Critical Thinking

1. Why is passion such a critical part of entrepreneurial success? Prim's founders were apparently passionate about building a company but not passionate about the laundry business specifically. In what ways is this combination problematic?
2. How could Prim's cofounders have better anticipated that laundry services would eventually see Prim as siphoning off their own business and be reluctant to work with them?
3. Rather than employ its own drivers to pick up and deliver laundry for its customers, Prim relied on the use of third-party delivery services. In what ways do you think this approach could have limited Prim's growth in other markets?
4. San Francisco, the city in which Prim launched, has several innovative laundry services. These services include LaundryLocker, where you drop your clothes in a public locker, Sfwash, a delivery service where you pay by the pound, and Sudzee, which requires special lockable bags. Spend some time studying (https://laundrylocker.com, https://sfwash.com), and Sudzee (https://sudzee. com). Select the service that you think has the most potential and explain the rationale for your selection. Compare the service to Prim's approach.

## Step 5: Extract text from page 5

## Tenacity Despite Failure

Because entrepreneurs are typically trying something new, the possibility of failure exists. In addition, the process of developing a new business is somewhat similar to what a scientist experiences in the laboratory. A chemist, for example, typically has to try multiple combinations of chemicals before finding an optimal combination that can accomplish a certain objective. In a similar fashion, developing a new business idea may require a certain degree of experimentation before success is attained. Setbacks and failures inevitably occur during this process. The litmus test for entrepreneurs is their ability to persevere through setbacks and failures.

An example of the degree of tenacity it sometimes takes to launch a successful firm is provided by Jerry Stoppelman and Russel Simmons, the cofounders of Yelp, the popular online review site. The original idea for Yelp, which was founded in 2004, is that when people are looking for a new restaurant, dentist, or plumber they normally ask their friends for recommendations. Yelp was launched to give people the ability to e-mail a list of their friends and ask for a recommendation. The message included a link that allowed the friend to easily respond. The business plan didn't work. People started complaining that they were getting too many e-mail messages from friends who often didn't have a recommendation to provide. Yelp could have died at this point. Instead, Stoppelman and Simmons demonstrated the tenacity it often takes to keep a business alive. Curiously, the one aspect of Yelp's business plan that did work was the ability to write your own review-a feature that had been included by Stoppelman and Simmons almost as an afterthought. Rather than responding to a friend's request for a recommendation, people seemed to enjoy sharing information about their favorite restaurant or hair salon without being asked. In 2005, Yelp pivoted and revised its business plan. The new plan dropped the "e-mail your friend idea" and focused on providing a platform for people to proactively write reviews of local businesses. Today, Yelp is one of the most popular review sites on the Internet.

## 6: Extract text from page 6

It's also important that entrepreneurs have sufficient tenacity to overcome personal obstacles along with professional ones. An example is Rick and Melissa Hinnant, the founders of Grace \& Lace, a company that makes lacy leg warmers for women. In 2010, the couple experienced a tragedy when they lost an unborn child. While Melissa was in the hospital with her unborn child a blanket, which kindled in her a desire to sew. In the fall of 2011, she made her first pair of lacy leg warmers, and everywhere she went, people would stop her and ask where she got them. That experience led to her and Rick Hinnant, which is now a full-blown women's apparel company. ${ }^{28}$ In 2013, Grace \& Lace appeared on Shark Tank, and received an offer from Barbara Corcoran. Reflecting on the episode, and the tenacity that Rick and Melissa Hinnant exhibited overcoming the loss of a child, Corcoran said:

The best pitch I heard last season (Season 5), was from Grace \& Lace, designers of lacy boot socks and leg warmers. When Melissa and Rick Hinnant burst onto the Shark Tank set, they exuded both the passion and street smarts that I know get all good entrepreneurs to the finish line. When they announced that they had $\$ 800,000$ in sales in their first year in business, they got the attention of all the sharks. But what got my attention was Melissa and Rick's backstory-a story they told proved that they were great entrepreneurs who knew how to take a hit and keep on kicking. They were great entrepreneurs who knew how to take a hit and keep on ticking. ${ }^{29}$

## Execution Intelligence

The ability to fashion a solid idea into a viable business is a key characteristic of successful entrepreneurs. Commonly, this ability is thought of as **execution intelligence.** ${ }^{30}$ In many cases, execution intelligence is the factor

--- Pages 42 to 44 ---

that determines whether a start-up is successful or fails. An ancient Chinese saying warns, “To open a business is very easy; to keep it open is very difficult.”

The ability to effectively execute a business idea means developing a business model, putting together a new venture team, raising money, establishing partnerships, managing finances, leading and motivating employees, and so on. It also demands the ability to translate thought, creativity, and imagination into action and measurable results. As Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon.com, once said, “Ideas are easy. It’s execution that’s hard.” For many entrepreneurs, the hardest time is shortly after they launch their firm. This reality was expressed by Jodi Gallaer, the founder of a lingerie company, who said, “The most challenging part of my job is doing everything for the first time.”

To illustrate solid execution, let’s look at The Bouqs Company, an online flower delivery service, which is the subject of Case 11.1 later in the book. The Bouqs was cofounded in 2012 by Jason Tabis and J. P. Montufar, largely out of their frustration with the state of the online cut-to-order flower delivery industry. At that time, about 90 percent of the flowers sold in the United States came from either Colombia or Ecuador, and passed through multiple layers of distributors and wholesalers before they reached the end consumer. In addition, most orders that were placed online were fulfilled by a local florist, who may or may not have the exact flowers the customer ordered. Tabis and Montufar took on the industry, primarily by creating an advantage via execution intelligence. Rather than utilizing conventional distribution channels, they established direct relationships with flower growers in Columbia, Ecuador, Chile, and across the United States and Canada. Flowers ordered via The Bouqs website were cut the day they were ordered and were shipped directly from the farm, allowing the flowers to reach the customer in 2–4 days rather than 10–14. This shortened timeframe resulted in providing customers flowers that were fresher and more attractive than competing offerings. Other aspects of ordering flowers online were improved. The selection available was carefully curated, so as to not overwhelm the customer, and only flowers that were available were displayed. Pricing was transparent, with all selections priced at $40 which included the product and shipping, with no hidden fees. In addition, The Bouqs only sourced flowers from farms that practiced sustainable, eco-friendly farming. The result: The Bouqs is a thriving cut-to-order online flower delivery firm, with both consumer and corporate clients. It has raised over $19 million in funding since 2012.

One way early-stage companies learn execution intelligence is by participating in start-up incubator and accelerator programs. In each chapter, we provide a “Savvy Entrepreneurial Firm” feature that presents you with an example of a tool or technique that well-managed entrepreneurial firms use to improve their performance. In the nearby “Savvy Entrepreneurial Firm” feature, we discuss the benefits of participating in a start-up incubator or accelerator program.

## Common Myths About Entrepreneurs

There are many misconceptions about who entrepreneurs are and what motivates them to launch firms to develop their ideas. Some misconceptions develop because of the media covering atypical entrepreneurs, such as a couple of college students who obtain venture capital to fund a small business that they grow into a multimillion-dollar company. Such articles rarely state that these entrepreneurs are the exception rather than the norm and that their success is a result of carefully executing an appropriate plan to commercialize what inherently is a solid business idea. Indeed, the success of many of the entrepreneurs we study in each chapter’s “Opening Profile” is a result of carefully executing the different aspects of the entrepreneurial process. Let’s look at the most common myths and the realities about entrepreneurs.

### LEARNING OBJECTIVE

4. Explain the five common myths regarding entrepreneurship.

## SAVVY ENTREPRENEURIAL FIRM

## Start-Up Incubators and Accelerators: A Smart Way of Gaining Access to Mentors, Partners, Investors, and Other Critical Start-up Resources

The number of start-up incubator and accelerator programs in the Unites States continues to grow. Incubators are organizations that provide start-ups with shared operating space. They are sponsored by universities, city or county governments, or nonprofit organizations. Incubators also provide start-up businesses access to networking opportunities, mentors, and shared equipment. Incubators typically do not ask for equity from their participants and do not provide seed funding. They were very popular in the 1980s and remain an important part of the entrepreneurial ecosystem in many areas.

Accelerators are a newer concept. They are mostly for-profit organizations that offer a small amount of seed funding in exchange for small equity positions in the companies that participate in their programs. Most accelerator programs admit start-ups in cohorts, and put the start-ups through a 10- to 15-week intensive program. The accelerator typically offers free office space, perks such as free WiFi and web hosting, weekly meetings with mentors, and coaching on how to put together an effective investor pitch. The programs normally culminate with a “Demo Day” which provides the participants the opportunity to pitch their business ideas to a group of investors, mentors, and reporters. The better programs will have 200+ investors present at their Demo Days. The greatest advantage of getting into either an incubator or accelerator program is the mentorship opportunities they provide. They are also fertile places for entrepreneurs to meet potential cofounders, business partners, and investors.

The two most well-known accelerator programs are Y Combinator and TechStars. Y Combinator is located in the Silicon Valley. It provides $120,000 in funding for 7 percent equity in each start-up it admits. Its participants are admitted in two, three-month sessions per year. It doesn’t offer office space. Instead, its program includes “office hours” where start-up founders meet individually and in groups with Y Combinator partners for advice. Founders also participate in weekly dinners where top-flight guests from the Silicon Valley ecosystem speak to the founders. Y Combinator’s motto is “Make Something People Want.” TechStars is similar to Y Combinator in that it is a three month program. It provides $18,000 in funding for a 6 percent equity stake. Started in Boulder, CO, it has expanded and now has 26 programs that are organized around themes. TechStars has offices in Atlanta, Chicago, Boulder, New York City, London, Seattle, and several other cities. Examples of the themes on which it focuses include Alexa (voice-powered technology), Internet of Things, music, and retail.

While admission to Y Combinator and TechStars is very competitive, there are a growing number of start-up incubators and accelerators in American cities. Most are accessible to hard-working start-up founders with promising business ideas. Many focus on a particular industry or sector, such as food, medical devices, software, mobile, or technology. To illustrate how prevalent start-up incubators and accelerators have become, the following is a list of start-up incubators and accelerators in five American cities. You can identify the start-up incubators or accelerators in your area by speaking to local entrepreneurs or investors or by conducting a simple Google search.

*   Capital Innovators is a start-up accelerator located in St. Louis. It provides tech start-ups $50,000 in seed funding, office space, access to weekly networking events, and follow-on funding opportunities.

*   Excelerator Labs is an intensive summer accelerator in Chicago. It selects 10 companies every spring to participate in a 13-week intensive summer program. The program is unique in that it attracts mentors from across the country who work with the participants on a one-on-one basis.

*   Capital Factory is an Austin, TX start-up incubator/ accelerator and coworking space. It also hosts meet-ups and other events for aspiring entrepreneurs. Its accelerator program offers mentorship opportunities and connects its entrepreneurs with investors, programs, and designers were involved in Capital Factory programs and events.

*   EnterpriseWorks is part of the University of Illinois’ Research Park. It’s a start-up incubator that hosts early-stage tech firms that are commercializing research emerging from the university’s labs. Its clients include start-ups focused on fields such as biotechnology, software development, and material sciences.

*   Food-X is a New York City-based business accelerator that is focused on launching food-related businesses. Its three-month program provides up to $50,000 in seed funding, coworking space with other food entrepreneurs, and access to a world-class network of food companies, investors, and press. Each week, participants meet with 3–5 expert mentors to test, validate, and accelerate their food ventures.

## Questions for Critical Thinking

1. If you were starting a new venture, do you think you would benefit from participating in a business incubator or accelerator program? If so, what do you think the primary benefits would be?

2. Find an example of a start-up incubator or accelerator program at the college or university you are attending, in the town in which you live, or in a nearby city. Describe the program. Which one of the programs mentioned in this feature does it resemble the most?

3. If you have a promising business idea, what can you do while you’re in college to improve your chances of being admitted to a prestigious start-up incubator or accelerator program when you graduate?

4. Make a list of the types of mentors that a participant in a start-up incubator or accelerator program might encounter.

## Myth 1: Entrepreneurs Are Born, Not Made

This myth is based on the mistaken belief that some people are genetically predisposed to be entrepreneurs. The consensus of many hundreds of studies on the psychological and sociological makeup of entrepreneurs is that entrepreneurs are not genetically different from other people. This evidence can be interpreted as meaning that no one is “born” to be an entrepreneur and that everyone has the potential to become one. Whether someone does or doesn’t is a function of environment, life experiences, and personal choices. However, there are personality traits and characteristics that are commonly associated with entrepreneurs; we list these in Table 1.3. These traits are developed over time and evolve from an individual’s social context. For example, studies show that people with self-employed parents are more likely to become entrepreneurs. After witnessing a father’s or mother’s independence in the workplace, an individual is more likely to find independence appealing. Similarly, people who personally know an entrepreneur are more than twice as likely to be involved in starting a new firm as those with no entrepreneur acquaintances or role models. The positive impact of knowing an entrepreneur is explained by the fact that direct observation of other entrepreneurs reduces the ambiguity and uncertainty associated with the entrepreneurial process.

## Myth 2: Entrepreneurs Are Gamblers

A second myth about entrepreneurs is that they are gamblers and take big risks. The truth is, entrepreneurs are usually **moderate risk takers**, as are most people. This finding is affirmed by The Hartford’s 2015 Small Business Suc- cess Study in which a total of 79 percent of the participants rated themselves as conservative rather than risky. The idea that entrepreneurs are gamblers originates from two sources. First, entrepreneurs typically have jobs that are less structured, and so they face a more uncertain set of possibilities than managers or rank-and-file employees. For example, an entrepreneur who starts a social network consulting service has a less stable job than one working for a state governmental agency. Second, many entrepreneurs have a strong need to achieve and often set challenging goals, a behavior that is sometimes equated with risk taking.

## TABLE 1.3 Common Traits and Characteristics of Entrepreneurs

| A moderate risk taker | Optimistic disposition |
| Persuasive | A networker |
| Promoter | Achievement motivated |
| Resource assembler/leverager | Alert to opportunities |
| Creative | Self-confident |
| Self-starter | Decisive |
| Tenacious | Energetic |
| Tolerant of ambiguity | A strong work ethic |
| Visionary | Lengthy attention span |

--- Pages 45 to 47 ---

## PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR

## Myth 3: Entrepreneurs Are Motivated Primarily by Money

It is naive to think that entrepreneurs don't seek financial rewards. As discussed previously, however, money is rarely the primary reason entrepreneurs start new firms and persevere. The importance and role of money in a start-up is put in perspective by Colin Angle, the founder and CEO of iRobot, the maker of the popular Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner. Commenting on his company's mission statement, Angle said:

Our "Build Cool Stuff, Deliver Great Products, Have Fun, Make Money, Change the World" (mission statement) kept us (in the early days of the Company) unified with a common purpose while gut-wrenching change surrounded us. It reminded us that our goal was to have fun and make money. Most importantly, it reminded us that our mission was not only to make money, but to change the world in the process.

Some entrepreneurs warn that the pursuit of money can be distracting. Media mogul Ted Turner said, "If you think money is a real big deal . . . you'll be too scared of losing it to get it." Similarly, Sam Walton, commenting on all the media attention that surrounded him after he was named the richest man in America by Forbes magazine in 1985, said:

Here's the thing: money never has meant that much to me, not even in the sense of keeping score . . . . We're not ashamed of having money, but I just don't believe a big showy lifestyle is appropriate for anywhere, least of all here in Bentonville where folks work hard for their money. We all know that everyone puts on their trousers one leg at a time . . . . I still can't believe it was news that I get my hair cut at the barbershop. Where else would I get it cut? Why do I drive a pickup truck? What am I supposed to haul my dogs around in, a Rolls-Royce?

## Myth 4: Entrepreneurs Should Be Young and Energetic

Entrepreneurial activity is fairly evenly spread out over age ranges. The recent age distribution of business owners, as reported in the Kauffman Index of Startup Activity, is shown in Table 1.4. As you see, the percentage of owners is quite evenly distributed across 4 major age categories. Not surprisingly, given this age distribution, the majority of business owners have work experience prior to launching a new venture. Although it is important to be energetic, investors often cite the strength of the entrepreneur (or team of entrepreneurs) as their most important criterion in the decision to fund new ventures. 
In fact, a

## TABLE 1.4 | Age Distribution of Business Owners

| Age | Percentage of Business Owners |
| --- | --- |
| 20-34 | 24.7 |
| 35-44 | 22.9 |
| 45-54 | 26.6 |
| 55-64 | 25.8 |

Source: R. W. Fairlie, A. Morelix, E. J. Reedy, and J. Russell, 2015 The Kauffman Index of Startup Activity: National Trends, available at Kauffman_index-startup_activity_national_trends_2015-1.pdf.

## Myth 5: Entrepreneurs Love the Spotlight

Indeed, some entrepreneurs are flamboyant; however, the vast majority of them do not attract public attention. In fact, many entrepreneurs, because they are working on proprietary products or services, avoid public notice. Consider that entrepreneurs are the source of the launch of many of the 3,100 companies listed on the NASDAQ, and many of these entrepreneurs are still actively involved with their firms. But how many of these entrepreneurs can you name? Perhaps three or four? Most of us could come up with Jeff Bezos of Amazon.com, Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook, and maybe Larry Page and Sergey Brin of Google or Elon Musk of Tesla and SpaceX. Whether or not they sought attention, these are the entrepreneurs who are often in the news. But few of us could name the founders of Netflix, YouTube, or DIRECTV, even though we frequently use these firms' services. These entrepreneurs, like most, have either avoided attention or been passed over by the popular press. They defy the myth that entrepreneurs, more so than other groups in our society, love the spotlight.

## Types of Start-Up Firms

As shown in Figure 1.2, there are three types of start-up firms: salary-substitute firms, lifestyle firms, and entrepreneurial firms.

Salary-substitute firms are small firms that yield a level of income for their owner or owners that is similar to what they would earn when working for an employer. Dry cleaners, convenience stores, restaurants, accounting firms, retail stores, and hairstyling salons are examples of salary-substitute firms. The vast majority of small businesses fit into this category. Salary-substitute firms offer common, easily available and not particularly innovative products or services to customers.

Lifestyle firms provide their owner or owners the opportunity to pursue a particular lifestyle and earn a living while doing so. Lifestyle firms include personal trainers, golf and tennis pros, owners of bed & breakfasts, and tour guides. These firms are not innovative, nor do they grow quickly. Commonly, lifestyle companies promote a particular sport, hobby, or pastime and may employ only the owner or just a handful of people.

Entrepreneurial firms bring new products and services to market. As we noted earlier, the essence of entrepreneurship is creating value and then disseminating that value to customers. In this context, value refers to worth, importance, 
or utility. Entrepreneurial firms bring new solutions to market by creating and seizing opportunities regardless of the resources they currently control.

## LEARNING OBJECTIVE

5. Describe the three types of start-up firms.

FIGURE 1.2 
Types of Start-Up Firms

*   Salary-Substitute Firms
    Firms that basically provide their owner or owners a similar level of income to what they would be able to earn in a conventional job
*   Lifestyle Firms
    Firms that provide their owner or owners the opportunity to pursue a particular lifestyle, and make a living at it
*   Entrepreneurial Firms
    Firms that bring new products and services to the market by creating and seizing opportunities regardless of the resources they currently control

## PARTNERING FOR SUCCESS

## Part ing with College Students via Campus Ambassador and Campus Rep Programs

A novel way that start-ups spread the word about their businesses is to create "campus ambassador" or "campus rep" programs. Most campus ambassador and campus rep programs fall somewhere between an internship and a job. The programs vary. Some recruit students to promote their brand on campus through an assortment of events, programs, and social media. Others ask students to create content, such as YouTube videos, articles for a company's main website, and Instagram photos of the company's products being used on their campus. Students often find these programs to be a great way to build their résumés, get work experience, earn a little extra money, and get their foot in the door of an exciting company. Companies that run campus ambassador or campus rep programs are typically looking for students who (1) have upbeat personalities, (2) are effective communicators, (3) have in-depth knowledge and a love for the product, (4) have effective marketing skills, and (5) have the ability to provide insightful feedback and advice. Here are examples of three campus ambassador or campus rep programs and how they work.

Apple. Apple Campus Reps work directly with the company's campus reps' team to tailor an approach for evangelizing Apple products on their local campus. Activities include planning and conducting workshops on Apple products, creating and distributing flyers and other promotional materials, and running competitions and events that highlight creative uses of Apple software and hardware. Apple Campus Reps make roughly $10 to $11 an hour, and work up to 15 hours per week. You can apply for the Apple Campus Reps program online at www.apple.com/education/campusreps.

Flex Watches: Flex Watches are colorful and flexible sport watches. The watches come in a variety of colors, and each color represents a different social or charitable cause. Ten percent of the purchase price of each watch is donated to its corresponding cause. The company's campus rep program looks for energetic and socially minded students who want to represent Flex Watches on their campus. Campus reps are charged with promoting the company's products and charity partnerships to students, and earn cash and Flex Watches products for their efforts. Campus reps must be active users of both Facebook and Instagram. Applications are available at https://flexwatches.com/campusreps.

Her Campus Media: Her Campus Media is the number one online community for college women. College females are recruited to setup Her Campus Chapters on their local campus. The local chapters sign up campus correspondents, who create, edit, and upload content to their chapter's website. The content focuses on six categories of interest to college females: style, beauty, health, love, life, and career. Local correspondents work with the company's national team to organize Her Campus events on their campus. Her Campus targets college females who are interested in journalism, public relations, marketing, or entrepreneurship. Information about starting a Her Campus Chapter is available at www.hercampus.com/start-your-own-campus-chapter.

Other companies that run well-regarded campus ambassador or campus rep programs include Chipotle, Victoria's Secret, CBS Sports, Adobe, Amazon, Rent the Runway, Prezi, and Monster Energy Drink.

## Questions for Critical Thinking

1. As part of your college experience, do you think you would benefit from participating in a campus ambassador or campus rep program? Why or why not?
2. In what ways would participating in a campus ambassador or campus rep program help you prepare to own your own business someday?
3. Why do you think companies such as Apple, Flex Watches, and Her Campus Media sponsor campus ambassador or campus rep programs? How do the companies benefit?
4. What types of start-ups would benefit the most from starting campus ambassador programs?

--- Pages 48 to 50 ---

Here is the text extracted from the lecture pages:


CHAPTER 1 | INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP | 47

Next, we describe the newly emerging characteristics of today's entrepreneurs. You may be surprised to learn about the types of individuals who are choosing to become entrepreneurs. While studying these characteristics, think about people you know who are accurately described by these characteristics. Do you think any of these people will choose to become entrepreneurs?

## Changing Demographics of Entrepreneurs

Over the past 10 years, the demographic makeup of entrepreneurial firms has changed in the United States and around the world. Of the 27.9 million businesses in the United States, 46 women, minorities, and seniors own an increasingly larger number of them. This is an exciting development for the entrepreneurial sector of the U.S. economy. An area of concern is millennials. Although millennials (people 18-34 years old) express a high degree of interest in becoming entrepreneurs, a surprisingly low percentage of people in the millennial age range are choosing the entrepreneurial path. There are many exceptions to this trend, such as the young entrepreneurs featured at the beginning of each chapter of this book.

## Women Entrepreneurs

While men are still more likely to start businesses than women, the number of women-owned businesses is increasing. According to a study commissioned by American Express OPEN, as of 2016, there were 11.3 million women-owned businesses in the United States. Very impressively, these businesses employ nearly nine million people and generate over $1.6 trillion in annual sales. Between 2007 and 2016, the number of women-owned firms increased by 45 percent, compared to just a 9 percent increase among all businesses. As a result, over the past nine years, the number of women-owned businesses has grown at a rate five times faster than the national average.

These are the faces of the entrepreneurs of the future. Collectively they will include more women and will be more ethnically diverse than at any time in the past.

LEARNING OBJECTIVE 
6. Discuss the changing demographics of entrepreneurs in the United States.

48 | PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR

Women are now the majority owners of 38 percent of U.S businesses, up from 29 percent in 2007. Of the 11.3 million women-owned firms, 44 percent are owned by minorities. This percentage, which has increased dramatically since 2002, includes 1.9 million women-owned firms owned by African Americans, 8.1 percent owned by Asian Americans, and 16.5 percent owned by Latinas.

The 10 states home to the greatest number of women-owned businesses are California, Texas, Florida, New York, Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, Ohio, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania. Women-owned firms can be found in every sector of the U.S. economy. Four sectors stand out, and these constitute roughly 6 in 10 women-owned firms (61 percent). These sectors are: Other Services (such as hair and nail salons and pet care businesses), Health Care and Social Assistance (such as child day care and home health care services), Professional/scientific/technical services (such as lawyers, accountants, and architects), and Administrative Support and Waste Management Services (such as office administrative support and travel agencies). 47

The number of groups that support and advocate for women-owned businesses continues to increase. An example of these groups is the National Association of Women Business Owners (www.nawbo.org), which provides a forum for women entrepreneurs to share their stories and support and encourage one another. 48

## Minority Entrepreneurs

There has been a substantial increase in minority entrepreneurs in the United States. The most comprehensive statistics are reported by the Minority Business Development Agency (www.mbda.gov). The most current data available for minority entrepreneurs is 2012, in contrast to the 2016 data available for women entrepreneurs. According to the data, there are eight million minority-owned firms in the United States—a 38 percent increase since 2007. This increase is encouraging. The average gross receipts for minority-owned firms was $58,119, down slightly from 2007. The industry sectors in which minority-owned firms operate are: Healthcare and Social Assistance (13 percent), Administrative Support and Waste Management and Redemption (12 percent), Professional/scientific/technical services (10 percent), Construction (9 percent), Transportation and Retailing (7 percent), Real Estate and Leasing (5 percent), and Other (37 percent). (Other is a catch-all for all remaining industries.)

Similar to women entrepreneurs, an important factor facilitating the growth of minority entrepreneurs is the number of organizations that promote and provide assistance. Examples include the Latin Business Association, Black Business Association, The National Center for American Indian Business Development, Asian Business Association, and the Minority Business Development Agency, which is part of the U. S. Department of Commerce.

## Senior Entrepreneurs

The number of seniors starting businesses is substantial and growing. According to the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) Office of Advocacy, the percentage of individuals age 62 and older starting a business increased from 4.2 percent in 1988 to 5.4 percent in 2015. The SBA characterized the grown senior entrepreneurs as healthy for the U.S. economy. This growth pattern is also no doubt welcomed by seniors who appreciate the challenge of starting a new business as a foundation for a new career.

The increase in senior entrepreneurs is attributed to a number of factors, including corporate downsizing, an increasing desire among older workers for more personal fulfillment in their lives, and growing worries among seniors that they need to earn additional income to pay for future health care services and

49 | CHAPTER 1 | INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP

other expenses. Many people in the 60 and older age range have substantial business experience, financial resources that they can draw upon, and excellent vigor and health, which make them ideal candidates to start businesses in many industries. In addition, the steady increase in life expectancy means that Americans are not only living longer, but are living healthier longer, and are likely to remain engaged in either a job or an entrepreneurial venture longer in their lives than earlier generations.

## Millennial Entrepreneurs

A desire to pursue an entrepreneurial career is high among millennials. According to a Bentley University survey, 66 percent of millennials have a desire to start their own business, 37 percent would like to work for themselves, and 25 percent would like to own a company. While encouraging, these statistics don't fully reflect the direction entrepreneurial millennials are taking. Consider for example that in 2013, only 3.6 percent of all businesses in the United States were owned by someone under the age of 30.  A 2016 study by EY and EIG tackled the question of what is constraining young people from becoming entrepreneurs. The findings affirmed the gap uncovered by the Bentley University survey. Millennials overwhelmingly (78 percent) consider entrepreneurs successful and more than half have considered starting their own business. The biggest obstacles preventing them from acting on their entrepreneurial desires are lack of finances, lack of desire to start a business, fear of failure, and a lack of knowledge of the business start-up process. 52 Other factors may include the attractiveness of corporate jobs, student debt, lack of savings, and risk aversion.

There are many forces at work encouraging millennials, in particular, to consider entrepreneurship as a career. More than 2,300 colleges and universities in the United States offer at least one course in entrepreneurship at the undergraduate or graduate level. Although the bulk of entrepreneurship education takes place within business schools, many other colleges and departments are offering entrepreneurship courses as well—including engineering, agriculture, law, hospitality management, and nursing. Additionally, the activities offered by a number of organizations are encouraging college students to consider becoming entrepreneurs. These organizations range from the Dorm Room Fund, which is a student-run venture fund, which invests in student-initiated start-ups, to Startup Weekend, which helps students organize teams and launch start-ups in 54 hours. A sample of these organizations is shown in Table 1.5. There are also resources available for non-college bound and/or non-college educated millennials who are considering an entrepreneurial career. For example, SBA Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs) across the United States are available to aspiring entrepreneurs. SBDC counselors provide encouragement and advice to people of all age ranges and offer a variety of free business consulting and training services.

## The Positive Effects of Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Firms

Entrepreneurship's importance to an economy and the society in which it resides was expertly articulated in 1934 by Joseph Schumpeter, an Austrian economist who did the majority of his work at Harvard University. In his book The Theory of Economic Development, Schumpeter argued that entrepreneurs develop new products and technologies that over time make current products and technologies obsolete. Schumpeter called this process creative destruction. Because new products and technologies are typically better than those they replace and the availability of improved products and technologies increases consumer 

LEARNING OBJECTIVE 
7. Discuss the positive effects of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial firms on economies and societies.

--- Pages 51 to 53 ---

## Step 1: Extract text from page 1

50 PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR

TABLE 1.5 Organizations that Help College Students Learn More about Entrepreneurship and/or Advance Their Business Ideas

| Organization | Description | Website Address |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 3-Day Startup | Offers a 3-day program that helps students kick-start companies and build entrepreneurial capabilities | http://3daystartup.org |
| CEO (Collegiate Entrepreneurs' Organization) | Premier entrepreneurship network with chapters on more than 240 college campuses | www.c-e-o.org |
| CollabFinder | This is a web platform that students across the country are using to team up on start-ups and other projects. A business student, for example, can use the platform to find an engineering student to collaborate on a business idea. | www.collabFinder.com |
| College Startup | An independent start-up news site dedicated to covering entrepreneurial people, companies, and events emerging from college campuses | www.collegestartup.org |
| Dorm Room Fund | This is a student-run venture fund that invests in student-initiated start-ups. It is backed by First Round Capital. | http://dormroomfund.com |
| Entrepreneurs' Organization | A global business network of 9,500+ business owners; runs the annual Global Student Entrepreneur Award program | www.gsea.org |
| Startup Weekend | Startup weekends are 54-hour events during which developers, marketers, product managers, and start-up enthusiasts come together to share ideas, form teams, build products, and launch start-ups. | http://startupweekend.org |
| VentureWell | A nonprofit organization that funds and trains faculty and student innovators to create new businesses | www.venturewell.org |

demand, creative destruction stimulates economic activity. The new products and technologies may also increase the productivity of all elements of a society. 

The creative destruction process is initiated most effectively by start-up ventures that improve on what is currently available. Small firms that practice this art are often called "innovators" or "agents of change." The process of creative destruction is not limited to new products and technologies; it can include new pricing strategies (e.g., Warby Parker in eyewear), new distribution channels (such as e-books for books), or new retail formats (such as IKEA in furniture and Whole Foods Market in groceries).

Now let's look more closely at entrepreneurship's importance.

## Step 2: Extract text from page 2

## Economic Impact of Entrepreneurial Firms

For two reasons, entrepreneurial behavior has a strong impact on an economy's strength and stability.

Innovation. Innovation is the process of creating something new, which is central to the entrepreneurial process.  According to the SBA Office of Advocacy, small innovative firms are 16 times more productive than large innovative firms in terms of patents per employee. Small firms tend to be particularly innovative in certain industries, as measured by patent activity. For example, small firms account for more than 32 percent of patents in both smart grids and solar energy and 15 percent of patents in batteries and fuel cells. 

Job Creation. According to the SBA, small businesses create a substantial number of net new jobs in the United States. For example, firms with fewer than 

500 employees created nearly two million of the roughly three million private sector jobs in 2014. More than seven million of the 11 million jobs created during the recent economic recovery in the United States were created by small firms. A key factor cited for the ability of small firms to create jobs is their skill when it comes to wisely and effectively deploying capital resources. 

A recent Kauffman Foundation study affirmed these numbers and provided additional insight. According to the study, it is not the size of a business that matters as much as its age. Companies less than one year old have created an average of 1.5 million jobs per year over the past 30 years. New and young companies also contribute to economic dynamism by injecting competition into markets and spurring innovation. 

## Entrepreneurial Firms' Impact on Society

Entrepreneurial firms' innovations have a dramatic impact on a society. Think of all the new products and services that make our lives easier, enhance our productivity at work, improve our health, and entertain us. For example, Amgen, an entrepreneurial firm that helped pioneer the biotechnology industry, has produced a number of drugs that have dramatically improved people's lives. An example is NEUPOGEN, a drug, which decreases the incidence of infection in cancer patients who are undergoing chemotherapy treatment. In addition to improved health care, consider smartphones, social networks, overnight package delivery, and digital photography. All these products are new to this generation, yet it's hard to imagine our world without them.

However, innovations do create moral and ethical issues with which societies are forced to grapple. For example, bar-code scanner technology and the 

## Step 3: Extract text from page 3

## The Entrepreneurial Process

The entrepreneurial process we discuss in this book consists of four steps:

Step 1 Decision to become an entrepreneur

Step 2 Developing successful business ideas

Step 3 Moving from an idea to an entrepreneurial firm

Step 4 Managing and growing an entrepreneurial firm

Figure 1.3 models the entrepreneurial process you'll study while reading this text. This process is the guide or framework around which we develop this book's contents. The double-headed arrow between the decision to become an entrepreneur and the development of successful business ideas indicates that sometimes the opportunity prompts an individual to become an entrepreneur. The four major stages of the entrepreneurial process and each stage's component parts (see Figure 1.3) are explained in the following sections.

## Decision to Become an Entrepreneur (Chapter 1)

As discussed earlier, people become entrepreneurs to be their own bosses, to pursue their own ideas, and to pursue financial rewards. Usually, a triggering event prompts an individual to become an entrepreneur.  For example, an individual may lose her job and decide that the time is right to start her own business or a person might receive an inheritance and for the first time in his life have the money to start his own company. Lifestyle issues may also trigger 

## Step 4: Extract the figure

FIGURE 1.3

Basic Model of the

Entrepreneurial Process


Decision to

Become an

Entrepreneur

Introduction to
entrepreneurship

|  | Developing Successful Business Ideas |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Recognizing <br> opportunities <br> and generating <br> ideas | Feasibility <br > analysis | Developing an <br> effective <br> business <br> model | Industry and <br> competitor <br> analysis | Writing a <br> business <br> plan |

--- Pages 54 to 56 ---

## Step 1: Extract text from page 53
entrepreneurial careers. For example, a woman may wait until her youngest child is in school before she decides to launch her own entrepreneurial venture.

## Step 2: Continue extracting text from page 53
## Developing Successful Business Ideas (Chapters 2–6)

Many new businesses fail not because the entrepreneur didn't work hard but because there was no real opportunity to begin with. Developing a successful business idea includes opportunity recognition, feasibility analysis, the development of an effective business model, industry analysis, and writing a business plan. Chapter 2 takes a scientific look at how entrepreneurs recognize opportunities and describes how the opportunity recognition process typically unfolds. Chapter 3 focuses on the feasibility analysis: the way to determine whether an idea represents a viable business opportunity. Chapter 4 focuses on the important topic of developing an effective business model. A firm's business model is its plan or recipe for how it creates, delivers, and captures value for its stakeholders. Entrepreneurial firms need to have a crystal clear understanding of the issues concerned with creating, delivering, and capturing value if they are to be successful. Industry and competitor analysis is our concern in Chapter 5. Knowing the industry in which a firm will choose to compete is crucial to an entrepreneur's success. In Chapter 6, we describe how to write a business plan. A business plan is a written document that describes all the aspects of a business venture in a concise manner. It is usually necessary to have a written business plan to raise money and attract high-quality business partners. Some entrepreneurs are impatient and don't want to spend the time it takes to write a business plan. 60 This approach is usually a mistake. Writing a business plan

## Step 3: Continue extracting text from page 53
FIGURE 1.3

Continued

$\longrightarrow$ |  | Moving from an Idea to an Entrepreneurial Firm
$\longrightarrow$ |  | Managing and Growing an Entrepreneurial Firm

CHAPTER 11 
Unique marketing issues

CHAPTER 12 
The importance of intellectual property

CHAPTER 13 
Preparing for and evaluating the challenges of growth

CHAPTER 14 
Strategies for firm growth

CHAPTER 15 
Franchising

## Step 4: Extract text from page 54
## Moving from an Idea to an Entrepreneurial Firm (Chapters 7–10)

The first step in turning an idea into reality is to prepare a proper ethical and legal foundation for a firm, including selecting an appropriate form of business ownership. These issues are discussed in Chapter 7. Chapter 8 deals with the important topic of assessing a new venture's financial strength and viability. Important information is contained in this chapter about completing and analyzing both historical and pro forma financial statements. Chapter 9 focuses on building a new-venture team. Chapter 10 highlights the important task of getting financing or funding and identifies the options a firm has for raising money.

## Step 5: Continue extracting text from page 54
## Managing and Growing an Entrepreneurial Firm (Chapters 11–15)

Given today's competitive environment, all firms must be managed and grown properly to ensure their ongoing success. This is the final stage of the entrepreneurial process.

Chapter 11 focuses on the unique marketing issues facing entrepreneurial firms, including selecting an appropriate target market, building a brand, and the four Ps—product, price, promotion, and place (or distribution). Chapter 12 examines the important role of intellectual property in the growth of entrepreneurial firms. More and more, the value of "know-how" exceeds the value of a company's physical assets. In addition, we will talk about protecting business ideas through intellectual property statutes, such as patents, trademarks, copyrights, and trade secrets.

Preparing for and evaluating the challenges of growth is the topic of Chapter 13. We'll look at the characteristics and behaviors of successful growth firms. In Chapter 14, we'll study strategies for growth, ranging from new product development to mergers and acquisitions. We conclude with Chapter 15, which focuses on franchising. Not all franchise organizations are entrepreneurial firms, but franchising is a growing component of the entrepreneurial landscape. When you finish studying these 15 chapters, you will have been exposed to all components of the entrepreneurial process—a process that is vital to entrepreneurial success.

## Step 6: Extract text from page 54
## Developing Skills for Your Career

LEARNING OBJECTIVE

9. Learn how understanding entrepreneurship and the entrepreneurial process can facilitate your career success.

In this chapter, we introduced you to the phenomenon known as entrepreneurship and described the entrepreneurial process as a path entrepreneurs can follow to be successful. As readers, some of you may not imagine that you would ever become an entrepreneur, others of you think you may develop an entrepreneurial venture at some time in the future while some of you may find the stories of the entrepreneurs discussed in the 15 chapters' "Opening Profile" features inspirational to the point that you are now contemplating launching an entrepreneurial venture as soon as possible. For all three types of readers, this book's contents address some of the "employability skills" that are critical to personal success within organizational settings. Let's see how this is so.

Business Ethics and Social Responsibility. From various sources, including the United Nations and corporate boards of directors, the need for and

## Step 7: Extract text from page 55
commitment to ethical business practices continues to strengthen. The same situation exists with respect to social responsibility in that increasingly, societies across the globe want organizations to be responsible for the effects of their actions on stakeholders. The importance of a strong ethical culture to an entrepreneurial firm's performance is fully discussed in Chapter 7. The materials you'll read in this chapter explain how to go about establishing a culture that is ethical and that generates ethical behaviors from employees on both a short- and long-term basis. These are insights that you can apply in any for-profit or not-for-profit organization in which you might choose to work as well as to entrepreneurial ventures.

Critical Thinking. As explained in Chapter 2, being able to think critically is linked to studying potential opportunities to determine if any of the identified opportunities are the foundation for a viable business venture. Identifying opportunities is inherently a goal-directed process through which which opportunities are specified that have the potential to help a person or an organization reach a valued outcome. Sometimes, however, that valued outcome is not reached. To address this matter, we include a feature called "What Went Wrong?" This feature is used to describe ineffective actions entrepreneurs took in the pursuit of entrepreneurial success. At the close of each feature is a set of questions that will challenge you to think critically about what the entrepreneur could have done to avoid the mistakes that were made.

Collaboration. A feature titled "Partnering for Success" appears in each chapter as well. In this feature, we describe how entrepreneurs collaborate with other people and organizations to reach some of their objectives. In each instance, you'll see that through partnerships, people sometimes are able to accomplish more by working together than they are by working independently.

Data Literacy. Learning how to access and interpret data is considered throughout your book particularly in Chapter 5. By studying this chapter, you will learn how firms gather data about competitors and then how they use those data to identify actions to take to outperform them.

## Step 8:  Continue extracting text from page 55
## Chapter Summary

LO1. Entrepreneurship is the process by which individuals pursue opportunities without regard to resources they currently control. A specific application of entrepreneurship, called corporate entrepreneurship, is the conceptualization of entrepreneurship at the organizational level. Entrepreneurial firms are proactive, innovative, and risk taking. In contrast, conservative firms take a more "wait and see" posture, are less innovative, and are risk averse.

LO2. The three primary reasons people decide to become entrepreneurs and start their own firms are as follows: to be their own boss, to pursue their own ideas, and to pursue financial rewards. Of these, the desire to be one's own boss or manager is the driving force of most individuals' decision to become an entrepreneur. While important, the desire to reap financial rewards from one's entrepreneurial endeavors is secondary to the other two reasons people decide to launch their own firm.

LO3. Passion for the business, product/customer focus, tenacity despite failure, and execution intelligence are the four primary characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. Of these four, being passionate about the firm most common characteristic shared among successful entrepreneurs. Commonly, the entrepreneur's passion is demonstrated by a belief that her/his firm will make a difference in people's lives. Always concentrating on the product or service as a means of satisfying a customer need, being

--- Pages 57 to 59 ---

## PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR

tenancious in pursuing an entrepreneurial opportunity, and the ability to craft a business idea into a viable business operation are the other key characteristics associated with successful entrepreneurs.

LO4. The five most common myths regarding entrepreneurship are that entrepreneurs are born, not made; that entrepreneurs are gamblers; that entrepreneurs are motivated primarily by money; that entrepreneurs should be young and energetic; and that entrepreneurs love the spotlight. The issue with myths is that, if unchecked, they can affect an individual's orientation toward and subsequent behaviors as an entrepreneur. The challenge for entrepreneurs is to carefully examine myths and prevent each of them from negatively affecting their approach to entrepreneurship.

LO5. There are three types of start-up firms. Entrepreneurial firms bring new products and services to market by recognizing and seizing opportunities regardless of the resources they currently control. Entrepreneurial firms stress innovation, which is not the case for salary-substitute and lifestyle firms. In the case of a salary-substitute firm, the entrepreneur seeks to earn an amount of income that is similar or identical to what she or he can earn by working as an employee for another company. Lifestyle firms are ones through which an entrepreneur can pursue a desire to experience a certain lifestyle (e.g., as a hunting trip guide) and earn a sufficient amount of income while doing so.

LO6. The demographic makeup of those launching entrepreneurial firms is changing in the United States and around the world. There is growing evidence that an increasing number of women, minorities, seniors, and millennials are becoming actively involved in the entrepreneurial process. Evidence suggests that these groups are capable of appropriately using the entrepreneurial process as a foundation for developing a successful entrepreneurial venture.

LO7. There is strong evidence that entrepreneurship and the entrepreneurial behavior associated with it have significantly positive impacts on the stability and strength of economies throughout the world. The areas in which entrepreneurial firms contribute

the most are innovation and job creation. Entrepreneurial behavior also has a dramatic impact on society. It's easy to think of new products and services that have helped make our lives easier, that have made us more productive at work, that have improved our health, and that have entertained us in new ways. In addition, entrepreneurial firms have a positive impact on the effectiveness of larger firms. There are many entrepreneurial firms that have built their entire business models around producing products and services that help larger firms increase their efficiency and effectiveness.

LO8. The four distinct elements of the entrepreneurial process, shown in Figure 1.3, are deciding to become an entrepreneur, developing successful business ideas, moving from an idea to establishing an entrepreneurial firm, and managing and growing an entrepreneurial firm. Each of these elements plays a critical role in entrepreneurial success. As a result, we carefully examine these elements in the book's remaining chapters.

LO9. After studying this book, some readers will decide they do not want to become entrepreneurs, others will conclude that becoming an entrepreneur at some point is desirable, while still others will decide to launch an entrepreneurial venture as quickly as possible. For all readers though, the tools, techniques, and concepts discussed in this book will further develop some of your "employability skills." In particular, by studying entrepreneurship, you will learn about the importance of using ethical business practices in entrepreneurial firms while simultaneously making certain that those firms commit to being socially responsible in all of their actions. Making these outcomes possible is a strong organizational culture, which you will better understand after reading this book. By contemplating how to use the entrepreneurial tools, techniques, and concepts featured in this book, you will enhance your critical thinking skills and the importance of collaborating with other firms in the pursuit of an entrepreneurial firm's desired objectives such as serving customers and societies and earning positive returns on your investments while doing so.

## Key Terms

business model, 53
business plan, 53
corporate entrepreneurship, 33
creative destruction, 49
entrepreneurial firms, 45
entrepreneurial intensity, 33
entrepreneurship, 32
execution intelligence, 40
innovation, 50
lifestyle firms, 45
moderate risk takers, 43
passion for their business, 36
product/customer focus, 38
salary-substitute firms, 45
triggering event, 52
value, 45

## MyLab Entrepreneurship
If your instructor is using MyLab Entrepreneurship, go to **www.pearson.com/mylab/entrepreneurship** to complete the problems marked with this icon ®.

## Review Questions

1-1. What are the characteristics of firms with higher entrepreneurial intensity? How can they be achieved?

1-2. What key insights does the GEM study provide us about entrepreneurship?

1-3. What does evidence show us about the rate of failure associated with entrepreneurial ventures?

1-4. What is entrepreneurship?

1-5. In what ways is an entrepreneur who just launched a restaurant different from someone who just took a job as the general manager of a restaurant owned by a major restaurant chain?

1-6. What are the three main attributes of firms that pursue high levels of corporate entrepreneurship?

1-7. How are the reasons for becoming an entrepreneur usually ranked?

1-8. How might an entrepreneur transition from a traditional job to owning their own business over time?

1-9. Why is passion such an important characteristic of successful entrepreneurs?

1-10. What is it about passion that makes it particularly compatible with the entrepreneurial process?

1-11. What are the skills and abilities required to effectively execute a business idea?

1-12. What are the startup types available to someone looking to start their own business?

1-13. What are the five common myths of entrepreneurship?

1-14. To what extent are entrepreneurs motivated by money?

1-15. What are the four distinctive parts of the entrepreneurial process and what is the relationship among the parts?

## Application Questions

1-21. After rereading the opening case, identify all of the effective and smart moves made by Fraser Doherty in the early days of SuperJam.

1-22. Assume that you are the dean of a business school and that you are interested in more entrepreneurship courses being offered in your school. Surprisingly to you, some professors are resisting the idea of offering these courses on the basis of their view that entrepreneurship is a skill that can only be learned through experience. Using materials in this chapter, make an argument that entrepreneurship can be taught.

1-23. As a business lecturer, Peter asked students in his class to form groups and present a few business ideas that they plan to pursue after their graduation. One particular group caught his attention with their idea of developing an ecotourism center in their neighborhood, which seems realistic and achievable. There might be a good opportunity for them to take this to the next level. However, when Peter spoke to them, it became clear that they had many misconceptions about entrepreneurship and were afraid to pursue it as a career. How can Peter ease their fears and convince them to fulfil their potential?

1-24. One question that is often asked by people thinking about launching an entrepreneurial venture is "what should first-time entrepreneurs know before they launch?" Based on information featured in this chapter, what should entrepreneurs know before they commit to launching their firm?

1-25. A friend has come up to you for advice. She has been contemplating starting a new venture for some time now, and after 15 years of being employed in the corporate sector, she has finally decided to pursue her dream of starting a wellness center with a focus on healthy living. However, she is still a little hesitant and a new venture for some time now, and were afraid to pursue it as a 

## 56 PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR

## CHAPTER 1 | INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP 57

a group of new students in your entrepreneurship class was heard arguing that being an entrepreneur positively affects being an entrepreneur in question only. They do not believe that an entrepreneur somehow benefits the society and the nation as well. They do not believe that creative destruction stimulates economic activity and increases the productivity of all elements of a society. Explain to them the positive effects of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial firms on economies and societies.

--- Pages 60 to 62 ---

## Step 1: Chapter 1 - Introduction to Entrepreneurship

### YOU BE THE VC 1.1 COMPANY: Shyp

- Web: www.shyp.com • Facebook: Shyp • Twitter: @shyp

Business Idea: Create a shipping service that picks up, packages, and ships items for individuals and businesses via the most affordable option available.

Pitch: Who likes shipping? You must rustle up a box, pack the item you'd like to ship, drive to the post office or UPS, wait in line, and pay whatever price they ring up. If you're a business that ships products to customers, it's even worse. For many online sellers, shipping is one of their largest cost categories and biggest headaches. Given the continuing increases in online sales, shipping problems for businesses will no doubt become even more serious.

No more. Shyp has developed a shipping service that takes all the hassle out of shipping. Here's how it works. A customer accesses a mobile app, where he or she enters a package's pick-up and destination addresses, and uploads a photo of the package to be shipped. In 20 minutes or less—that's the goal—a courier arrives and whisks the item away. True to the company's tagline—“We'll take it from here”—Shyp then places the item in a box, prepares a label, and ships it in the most affordable manner, which could be USPS, UPS, FedEx, or a local carrier. Shyp does all this for $5 plus the price of shipping. Unlike Uber and Lyft, all of Shyp's employees are just that—employees, rather than independent contractors, and receive benefits such as health insurance. By bypassing the independent contractor option, Shyp has built a healthy culture and has kept out of the contentious debate over contractors vs. employees.

Shyp makes money in two ways with the first being the $5 pickup fee. The second way the firm makes money is 

that because of the volume it ships, it is able to negotiate deep discounts with shippers. It captures the difference between the retail price of shipping (which is what it charges its customers) and what it actually pays.

Shyp services both individuals and business clients. It noticed early on that customers were using its service to return items to online retailers. As a result, it launched a service called Shyp Returns, to handle returns for online sellers, and forged partnerships with e-commerce companies such as Amazon, Target, and Bonobos. Now, the customers of those companies, in the communities in which Shyp operates, can use Shyp to return items rather than doing it themselves. Shyp has a similar arrangement with eBay. Shyp also caters to small businesses. It has, in effect, become the shipping department for many online retailers in the communities in which it operates, relieving those businesses of the hassles involved with shipping. The beauty of Shyp's business model is that it benefits its customers in two ways that are meaningful for virtually everyone. Specifically, using Shyp saves customers' time and money.

Currently, Shyp is available in Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco, and Chicago. It plans to add new cities soon.

1-27. Based on the material covered in this chapter, what questions would you ask the firm's founders before making your funding decision? What answers would satisfy you?

1-28. If you had to make your decision on just the information provided in the pitch and on the company's website, would you fund this company? Why or why not?

### YOU BE THE VC 1.2 COMPANY: Vital Vio

- Web: www.vitalvio.com • Facebook: Vital Vio • Twitter: @vitalvio

Business Idea: Design, manufacture, and sell LED lights that kill bacteria and other organisms in high-risk environments, such as health-care settings, airplanes, gyms, restaurants, office buildings, and public restrooms.

Pitch: On a daily basis, people spend time in environments that are high-risk for contracting infections. According to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, one in 25 patients in a hospital or health-care setting like a nursing home will contract a health-associated infection. This is a serious concern. MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), which is a common infection contracted in hospitals, is resistant to antibiotics. In the United States alone, 99,000 deaths per year are associated with hospital-acquired infections.

There are other high-risk environments that most of us enter frequently such as airplanes, classroom buildings, restaurants, gyms, and public restrooms. For example, MRSA survives in the seat pocket material on airplanes for as long as 168 hours and E. coli lives for up to 96 hours on a rubber armrest. Similarly, studies have shown that the grips on machines in fitness centers and gyms often have high counts of bacteria. Airplane cleaning crews and others are aware of the risks, and do what they can to periodically disinfect the most vulnerable surfaces. Still, people contract infections in these settings, which can lead to serious health complications.

Vital Vio has designed, manufactured, and is selling lighting systems that tackle these problems in a new way. Its 

lights emit a precise spectrum of white light, created with patent pending LED technology, which kills harmful bacteria, with no adverse effects on humans or animals. Hospitals and others already use ultraviolet lights to disinfect surfaces, but UV light is not safe for people to absorb. Vital Vio sells overhead lights that can be retrofitted into existing lighting systems and under cabinet lights. Once installed, Vital Vio's technology is disinfecting every area of a room at all times, just at different rates based on distance. Vital Vio's system works by manipulating light in a manner to achieve passive decontamination of specific bacteria, such as MRSA, E. coli, and Salmonella.

Traditional methods of decontamination, such as manually wiping down a counter with a cleaning product and paper towel, can be effective but are intermittent in their use. The advantage of Vital Vio's passive approach is that as long as the lights are left on, decontamination occurs on a continuous basis.

Vital Vio manufactures proprietary LED lights to compete in specific markets and licenses its technology to manufacturers that are competing in other areas.

1-29. Based on the material covered in this chapter, what questions would you ask the firm's founders before making your funding decision? What answers would satisfy you?

1-30. If you had to make your decision on just the information provided in the pitch and on the company's website, would you fund this company? Why or why not?

## Step 7: CASE 1.1 SoulCycle: A Classic Entrepreneurial Tale

### Introduction

Imagine the following. You're in the midst of a stressful day. You have a great deal on your mind and there is a problem at work you're trying to sort out. Your phone hums to remind you of your 4:00 pm SoulCycle workout. You make the short drive to the SoulCycle studio. You walk in, and the young woman at the desk greets you by name. She hands you a bottle of water (she remembers you like Dasani). You slip your iPhone into your bag because phones are not allowed at SoulCycle. You enter which is lit by scented candles, is dim. The spinning class begins, and you and 30 other riders pick up the 

SoulCycle studio in Los Angeles, CA.

Bruce R. Barringer, Oklahoma State University

R. Duane Ireland, Texas A\&M University

## Step 8: Introduction Continued

Imagine the following. You're in the midst of a stressful day. You have a great deal on your mind and there is a problem at work you're trying to sort out. Your phone hums to remind you of your 4:00 pm SoulCycle workout. To get to their first customers, Rice and Cutler went to door to door in the neighborhood and worked their personal networks. They also delivered swag bags to as many of the health and beauty editors in New York City they could get in to see. They were also determined that their secret sauce—the thing that would get people talking about SoulCycle—would be the experience they delivered. At that time, there were no fitness boutiques in New York City, other than Yoga and Pilates studios. They were just mainstream fitness centers and spinning studios, some of which offered spinning as one of many classes. SoulCycle would be the first spinning boutique in the city—and Rice and Cutler were determined to nail it.

## Step 9: The SoulCycle Experience

The instructor. The SoulCycle experience starts with the instructors. A spinning class is led by an instructor, who rides a bike that faces the participants. The instructor is the pacesetter, the coach, and the motivator. At the time SoulCycle opened, spinning instructors either did it part time or picked up jobs at several fitness centers to cobble together an income. Rice and Cutler decided to change that, and hired instructors on a full-time basis. As a result, they got the best instructors and their clients got consistency. Providing instructors full-time jobs—which included health insurance—also gave the best instructors a chance to make spinning instruction a career. That greatly enhanced SoulCycle's chances to retain the best instructors.

The music. A big part of the SoulCycle experience is the music. Each instructor curates a playlist for each session. Music plays during the entire 45 minute experience. The music is chosen to match the ebbs and flows of the levels of intensity of the session. No two sessions are the same, and different instructors releases a “best of” list of songs played in its studios that month. But the individual playlists aren’t released—you have to be present to hear the music.

The atmosphere. The atmosphere is unique. The studios are softly lit, with most of the light coming from scented candles. Smartphones are not allowed during the spinning sessions. The idea is to offer an experience that is at the same time loud and group-oriented and quiet and private. The SoulCycle experience is also conducive to making new friends. Many people have repeated that design element—this time deliberately—in many of its other studios.

--- Pages 63 to 65 ---

## PART 1 | DECISION TO BECOME AN ENTREPRENEUR

### 62

SoulCycle is also both technologically advanced and primitive. Both are intentional. Its stationary bikes and sound systems are state of the art. At the same time there are no clocks in the studios, there are no rankings (some spinning studios rank the riders based on who is riding the hardest), and there is no gamification. People can wear Fitbits or other devices to monitor themselves. But as far as SoulCycle is concerned, the purer the experience, the better.

Everything about SoulCycle's atmosphere is intended to reinforce the experience the company wants to deliver. It wants people to have a good workout but to also find joy and contentment in the music, the soft light, the lyrics of the songs, the familiarity of the instructor, the friendships that are made, and so forth. That's the secret sauce on which the company is built.

Training. Rice and Cutler knew that for SoulCycle to be scalable, they had to perfect the SoulCycle experience and make it repeatable and teachable. So they focused heavily on training from day one. New instructors go through an eight-week training program. They're in school from 9:00 am to 5:00 pm every day, and ride an additional 5-6 times per week. The employees who work the front desk, and have the most direct interaction with customers, go through the SoulCycle hospitality school. The hospitality school focuses on topics such as the history of the brand, what is customer service, how to effectively communicate with colleagues, and so forth. One staple of SoulCycle's philosophy on training is that each new hire, regardless of rank, spends time working the front desk of a SoulCycle studio. The front desk is the best place, in Rice and Cutler's view, for a new employee to experience and learn SoulCycle's culture.

## The Growth Years

The first SoulCycle studio was a success. Within six months of opening, it was profitable and had waiting lists for its classes. Rice and Cutler thought in the early months they would service about 75 people a day—it turned out to be between two and three hundred. Via the strength of the SoulCycle experience, the company had literally created a marketplace for its product.

The second SoulCycle studio opened in the Tribeca area of New York City. In the early days, people had to show up for SoulCycle classes early and put their name on a waiting list. To make things easier, SoulCycle developed the first online reservation system for a fitness boutique in New York City. It instantly became popular. Many classes would fill up within a few minutes of when their time-slots became available online. SoulCycle started selling branded apparel when its first studio opened in 2006. It added e-commerce in 2010. SoulCycle currently releases 12 private label collections per year. Pieces generally sell for about $40 for a top to $85 and higher for pants and sweatshirts. Many

SoulCycle enthusiasts have multiple combinations of SoulCycle outfits.

SoulCycle's early growth took place primarily in the New York City area, where it steadily added studios. In 2011, the company decided to expand to California. At that time, Rice and Cutler sold SoulCycle to Equinox Fitness. The cofounders felt they needed experienced hands involved to manage what was anticipated to be rapid growth. Rice and Cutler stayed on and have managed SoulCycle as one of Equinox's brands.

## Current Status and Challenges

SoulCycle now has 85 locations in the United States with approximately 20,000 riders each week. It has had riders as old as 85 and as young as 12. The company employs 1,500 people and reported sales of over $112 million in 2014.

Along with its continued success, SoulCycle faces a number of challenges. Companies like Peleton (www.peleton.com) now make high-quality stationary bikes that allow people to experience spinning classes at home through rich multimedia connections. The classes are available on-demand, which means that the classes are archived and you can take a class from your favorite instructor anytime you want—you don't have to show up at a studio at a particular time. A number of SoulCycle imitators have also sprung up, and offer classes at a lower rate than SoulCycle's current rate of $34 for a 45-minute class.

## Discussion Questions

1-31. Which of the characteristics of successful entrepreneurs, discussed in the chapter, do you see in Julie Rice and Elizabeth Cutler? To what degree do you think these characteristics have contributed to SoulCycle's success?

1-32. How does SoulCycle's basic offering, its 45 min-ute spinning classes, "add value" to the lives of its customers?

1-33. On a scale of 1 to 10 (10 is high), rate SoulCycle on execution intelligence. Make a list of at least five things that you think SoulCycle did particularly well in this area. Justify your numerical ranking.

1-34. Talk about the challenge that Peleton poses to SoulCycle. If you were asked to advise SoulCycle on how to respond to the Peleton threat, what would you tell the company to do?

## CASE 1.2

## PatientsLikeMe: Allowing People with Serious Diseases to Connect with One Another and Exchange Support and Advice

- Web: www.patientslikeme.com • Facebook: PatientsLikeMe • Twitter: @patientslikeme

### Introduction

It is a sad yet heartwarming story. In 1998, Stephen Heywood, a strong 29-year-old carpenter who was building his dream house in California, got the worst possible news. He was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig's disease. His brothers, Jamie and Ben, stood by his side as he doggedly fought his disease and pursued a cure. Stephen eventually succumbed to ALS, but his courageous journey will always be remembered through an autobiographical movie, So Much So Fast, and a book, His Brother's Keeper, by Pulitzer Prize-winning author Jonathan Weiner.

Helping Stephen deal with the day-to-day challenges of his disease and experiencing firsthand the decisions that have to be made and the lack of information that's often available profoundly changed the direction of Jamie and Ben Heywood's lives. In

## CHAPTER 1 | INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP

### 63

1999, Jamie Heywood launched an organization called the ALS Therapy Development Institute, to help Stephen and others fight ALS. Today, it remains well funded and staffed and supports a number of research efforts. In 2005, Jamie and his brother Ben took an additional step and launched PatientsLikeMe, a web-based company, which allows people with life-changing diseases to converse with one another, share their experiences, and learn techniques from each other that help them better cope with their diseases.

Since its launch, PatientsLikeMe has achieved remarkable success. Any patient with any medical condition can join the site. As a result, the company now has nearly 500,000 members sharing their experiences with respect to over 2,700 conditions. Of particular note are the 9,000 ALS members, making PatientsLikeMe the largest online population of ALS patients in the world. At the heart of PatientsLikeMe's success is a truly unique value proposition—a platform that encourages patients

## PatientsLikeMe provides a means for patients to connect with others who have the same medical condition. The patients in the community share information and support one another. In the process, they generate data about the nature of the condition.

### Value Proposition

PatientsLikeMe's value proposition is the opposite of what you might expect, in that conventional thinking is that a person's medical information is private and should be kept confined to a tight circle of family and health-care providers. PatientsLikeMe advocates that people openly share their experiences to help others. It is inspirational in that most of its members have illnesses that consume a great deal of their own time and energy, yet they are willing to expend time and effort to share information to improve the lives of others.

Here's how it works. Say someone you care about has been diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, a neurological disorder. On PatientsLikeMe, that person will be able to interact with people who have been living with Parkinson's disease for 3 years, 5 years, 10 years, or more. Your friend or loved one will be able to ask, "What's it like after 3 years? What's the best outcome I can hope for and how can I get there?" This question which is: "Given my status, what's the best outcome I can hope for and how can I get there?" will be answered by someone who has the disease and who truly understands all the emotions and fears rather than being answered by a medical professional.

PatientsLikeMe's service is unique in that it not only facilitates these types of interactions but also collects detailed information from its members about the symptoms they're experiencing, medications they're on, and how their diseases are affecting their lives. It then displays this data in aggregate form for its members and others to see. It also drills deeper. It allows patients to share the experiences they're having with a particular drug, for example, including how long they've been on the drug, what the side effects have been, whether they feel the drug has been effective, and so forth. This is information that people who have just been prescribed a drug are anxious to see. Members can also interact directly with each other regarding their experiences. For example, Carbidopa-Levodopa is a drug commonly prescribed for Parkinson's disease patients. Someone named "Mary O." may have reported on her profile that "When I first started taking Carbidopa-Levodopa I made me sleepy, but over time my body adjusted and I no longer have that side effect." If you've just been prescribed Carbidopa-Levodopa, you can send a message to Mary O. and ask her, "How sleepy did you get? Was it so bad you couldn't go to work? How long did it take before your body adjusted? Did you try caffeine? Did it help?" Mary O. would then respond and answer the questions. In addition,

## 64 

as a result of this exchange, you and Mary O. may start to regularly correspond, and Mary O. may become, for you, an important source of information and support.

What's remarkable about PatientsLikeMe's value proposition is that the information its members exchange and the manner in which it aggregates and displays data aren't available anywhere else. The degree to which its members are willing to be transparent about very personal health-related issues is also compelling. Along with maintaining its website and member communities, PatientsLikeMe has also become an authoritative voice in the medical community. It has published over 80 peer-reviewed research studies. Recently, PatientsLikeMe's vice president for advocacy, Sally Okun, made a highly visible presentation at TEDMED about the idea of building a "patient lexicon" to make it as easy for patients to talk about their conditions and compare notes as it is for doctors. The eight-minute talk titled "Does Anyone in Healthcare Want to Be Understood?" is available at www.tedmed. com. Simply type "Sally Okun" into the search bar.

### Revenue Driver

Although its services are free to users, PatientsLikeMe is a for-profit entrepreneurial venture. The company makes money by aggregating the information its members share and selling it to its partners. Its partners include members of the medical community such as drug companies, medical-device companies, insurance companies, and health-care providers. For example, the aggregate data of how patients with Parkinson's disease are reacting to a particular medication would be of interest to the company that makes that medication. The sharing of this information then circles back and helps patients. For example, if the maker of a drug finds that a large percentage of people who take the drug experience fatigue, the drug may not only translate into feeling better, but may mean fewer days missed from work or even the ability to maintain a job rather than having to quit. Because have their personal data included in larger databases and passed along to companies in the medical industry. Finally, their experiences and their voices become part of the data that medical companies study when making decisions about patients and their care. PatientsLikeMe is very transparent about the fact that it sells its patients' data as integral to its mission. It does not share or sell personally identifiable information without the explicit consent of the member.

There are no ads or sponsorships on PatientsLikeMe's website. The company's sole intention is to align the interests of its members with the medical community.

### Challenges Ahead

PatientsLikeMe is expanding its reach. Although its site originally focused exclusively on life-threatening diseases, it has opened its doors to any patient

--- Page 66 ---

with any condition. This expansion has resulted in communities that focus on issues such as infertility (for both men and women), mood conditions (including depression), and hearing loss. Rapid growth is a challenge for all firms, and PatientsLikeMe is in a rapid-growth phase. In fact, at the time this case was written, PatientsLikeMe was supporting communities for more than 2,700 conditions. Several recent developments bode positively for PatientsLikeMe's future. The effectiveness of the company's platform in improving patient outcomes has been affirmed in at least three studies. In early 2017, PatientsLikeMe entered into a broad-ranging partnership with digital life company iCarbonX to gain a better understanding of human health and disease. The partnership was accompanied by a $100 million investment made by iCarbonX and other investors.

There are also several worries that surround a service such as PatientsLikeMe. The company openly acknowledges these worries but believes the benefits outweigh the risks. One worry is that some employers may not want to employ people with a high-cost or high-risk disease. Again, it's possible that some people may reveal the existence of a disease on their PatientsLikeMe profiles that may jeopardize current or future employment opportunities. Another worry is the unknowns about changes to health-care policies and the overall health-care system in the United States as a result of the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and as of early 2017, the effects of potential changes to the ACA.

For now, PatientsLikeMe is aggressively moving forward. The company's overarching goal, along with providing the value it currently provides, is to shift the thinking of companies in the medical industry by providing them access to data they never had before. By better knowing the journey that patients are taking, the hope is that the medical community will increasingly go beyond treating patients' core diseases and create products that will impact all aspects—physical, social, and mental—of patients' lives.

## Discussion Questions

1-35. Of the three reasons articulated in Chapter 1 that motivate people to start businesses, which of the three reasons was the primary motivation behind Jamie and Ben Heywood's decision to launch PatientsLikeMe?

1-36. How do those who are leading PatientsLikeMe practice "product/customer focus"? How do they practice "execution intelligence"?

1-37. What type of start-up firm is PatientsLikeMe?

Sources: PatientsLikeMe website, www.patientslikeme.com (accessed January 27, 2017); J. Engel, "PatientsLikeMe Nabs $100M, Works to Advance Personalized Medicine," Xconomy, available at https://www.xconomy.com/boston/2017/01/06/patientslikeme-nabs-100m-works-to-advance-personalized-medicine/?single_page=true (posted January 6, 2017, accessed January 27, 2017); R. Bradley, "Rethinking Health Care with PatientsLikeMe," Fortune, April 15, 2013.

## MyLab Entrepreneurship

If your instructor is using MyLab Entrepreneurship, go to **www.pearson.com/mylab/entrepreneurship** for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:

1. What are the four primary traits and characteristics of successful entrepreneurs? Of the four traits, which ones are the most descriptive of Fraser Doherty, the entrepreneur whose experiences and successes are described in this chapter's Opening Profile?

2. What is execution intelligence? Use your understanding of this concept to think about the execution intelligence displayed by Prim, the focus of the "What Went Wrong?" feature" in the chapter. On a scale of 1 to 10 with 10 representing "outstanding execution intelligence," what rating do you ascribe to Prim in terms of execution intelligence and why?

## Endnotes

1. SuperJam homepage, www.superjam.co.uk; "Fraser Doherty: 'How I Set Up SuperJam,'" Newbusiness.co.uk, www.newbusiness.co.uk/articles/entrepreneurs/fraser-doherty-how-i-set-superjam (accessed September 5, 2011, originally posted December 21, 2009); "Q&A: Fraser Doherty—SuperJam," Inspiresme.co.uk, www.inspiresme.co.uk/interviews/q-a-fraser-doherty-superjam (accessed September 5, 2011, originally posted May 31, 2011).

2. D. Kelley, S. Singer, and M. Herrington, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, 2016/16 (Babson, Universiti Tun Abdul Razak, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Universidad del Desarrollo, and International

3. D. Kelley, S. Singer, and M. Herrington, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, 2016/16 (Babson, Universiti Tun Abdul Razak, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Universidad del Desarrollo, and International Council for Small Business, 2015), Babson College, MA.

4. N. Khe Lil, "The Many Faces of Entrepreneurial Failure," Journal of Business Venturing 31, no. 1 (2016): 72–94.

5. Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor, available at https://www.bls.gov/bdm/entrepreneurship/bdm_chart3.htm (accessed December 19, 2016).